Add Template to Core Guide to Kusama (#5879)
w3f/polkadot-wiki: docs/build/build-guides-template-basic.md

---
id: build-guides-template-basic

> title: Template to Core - Setup & Initial Deployment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Template to Core - Setup & Initial Deployment of a Parachain
```

> sidebar_label: Template to Core - Basics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sidebar_label: Parachain Template Guide
```

> description: Introduction to the Polkadot SDK

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: A minimal guide on how to deploy a parachain using Polkadot SDK's parachain template.
```

keywords: [coretime, blockspace, parathread, parachain, cores, coretime, agile]
slug: ../build-guides-template-basic
---

:::warning This guide uses Rococo!

> This guide uses the Rococo testnet. The Kusama relay chain can also be used in place of Rococo, as
> coretime is also implemented there. Polkadot will implement agile coretime later after it has been
> tested on Kusama. This guide is considered a moving document - and will update as networks that have
> coretime enabled become suitable candidates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide uses the Rococo testnet. The Kusama relay chain can also be used in place of Rococo, as
coretime is also enabled there. Polkadot will enable agile coretime after it has been thoroughly
tested on Kusama. This guide is considered a moving document - and will update as networks that have
coretime enabled become suitable candidates.
```

:::

This guide aims to get you up and running with the basics of:

- **Obtaining** coretime (bulk or on-demand)
- **Compiling** and configuring your first template
- **Deploying** your template on your procured core

## Getting ROC and Reserving a ParaId

> Before starting to work with coretime, you'll need some funds to pay fees, reserve a
> [ParaId](../general/glossary.md#paraid), and more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before starting to work with coretime, you'll need some ROC tokens to pay fees, reserve a
[ParaId](../general/glossary.md#paraid), and more.
```

to upload our parachain's code:

1. Get the [Polkadot.js Web Extension.](https://polkadot.js.org/extension/)
2. Create a wallet, and get some [ROC via the faucet.](https://faucet.polkadot.io/) with your new
   address.
3. Go to the [Polkadot.js Web App](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#), and make sure you select
   **Rococo** as your network via the tabs on the side
   [or visit this link to get to Rococo directly](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/?rpc=wss%3A%2F%2Frococo-rpc.polkadot.io#/explorer)
4. Head to
   [Network > Parachains > Parathreads (the tab)](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/parachains/parathreads)
5. [Follow these instructions to reserve a ParaId.](../learn/learn-guides-coretime-parachains#reserve-paraid)

You can also visit the Accounts tab to view all registered accounts and associated balances within
the Polkadot.js Extension. Once finished, you should see your new ParaId at the bottom of the list
within [Network > Parachains > Parathreads](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/parachains/parathreads)
with the option to "Deregister" to the right:

![Registered ParaID in PolkadotJs](../assets/coretime/Coretime-ParaId-Registered.png)

> ## Creating our Chain & Generating Artifiacts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Compiling Parachain Runtime and Generating Wasm Blob
```

We can now move on to working with the template. Some essential prerequisites are:

> 1. **Have** Rust and its associated tooling installed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Install** Rust and its associated tooling.
```

> 2. **Install** the nightly version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Install** the [Rust nightly version](https://rust-lang.github.io/rustup/concepts/channels.html#working-with-nightly-rust).
```

3. **Have** a command line, git, and other common development tools.

:::info Install dependencies

Visit [the dependencies' installation](./build-guides-install-deps.md) page before starting.

:::

We need to clone the Polkadot SDK. This guide uses release
[`polkadot-v1.10.0`](https://github.com/paritytech/polkadot-sdk/releases/tag/polkadot-v1.10.0),
which can be cloned using the appropriate release tag:

```shell
git clone git@github.com:paritytech/polkadot-sdk.git --branch polkadot-v1.10.0 --single-branch
```

Now, navigate to `polkadot-sdk/templates/parachain`:

```bash
cd polkadot-sdk/templates/parachain
```

Open this in your code editor of choice. This template contains the necessary dependencies we need
to utilize a core.

> ### Using the Parachain Template

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Compiling the Parachain Template Node
```

This tutorial won't go into the specifics of the template, nor will it go into the specifics of
FRAME and Substrate. All you need to know is the following:

- `runtime/` - Contains the runtime and business logic. This is how all of your pallets (runtime

>   modules) are configured. The runtime is what gets uploaded to the core as a WebAssembly blob once
>   it's compiled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  modules) are configured. The runtime, once it's compiled as a WebAssembly blob, is uploaded to the state on-chain.
```

> - `node/` - The node implementation takes care of networking and the like. The genesis configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `node/` - The node implementation takes care of networking and RPC setup. The genesis configuration
```

  (`chain_spec.rs`) is also located here.

> Pallets are essentially just Rust crates, which are imported as dependencies, as seen in
> `runtime/Cargo.toml`. Read more about
> [pallets here.](https://paritytech.github.io/polkadot-sdk/master/polkadot_sdk_docs/polkadot_sdk/frame_runtime/index.html#pallets)

When we compile our template, we can extract the runtime code as a `.wasm` blob, which is one of the
key artifacts for our core.

For the sake of this example, we won't go into adding or modifying any pallets. However, this is
definitey a next step after you get used to deploying your parachain on Rococo!

> ### Getting our parachain live-ready

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Configuring Parachain's Chain Spec
```

> Before we generate our parachain's code, we have a bit of prep to do to our node inside

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before we generate the binary for our parachain's node, we have a bit of prep to do to our node inside
```

                    get_account_id_from_seed::<sr25519::Public>("Alice"),
                    get_account_id_from_seed::<sr25519::Public>("Bob"),
                    get_account_id_from_seed::<sr25519::Public>("Charlie"),
                    get_account_id_from_seed::<sr25519::Public>("Dave"),
                    get_account_id_from_seed::<sr25519::Public>("Eve"),
                    get_account_id_from_seed::<sr25519::Public>("Ferdie"),
                    get_account_id_from_seed::<sr25519::Public>("Alice//stash"),
                    get_account_id_from_seed::<sr25519::Public>("Bob//stash"),
                    get_account_id_from_seed::<sr25519::Public>("Charlie//stash"),
                    get_account_id_from_seed::<sr25519::Public>("Dave//stash"),
                    get_account_id_from_seed::<sr25519::Public>("Eve//stash"),
                    get_account_id_from_seed::<sr25519::Public>("Ferdie//stash")
                ],
                get_account_id_from_seed::<sr25519::Public>("Alice"),
                (YOUR_PARA_ID_HERE).into()
            )
        )
        .with_protocol_id("template-local")
        .with_properties(properties)
        .build()
}
```

> Once this is in place, you are ready to compile your parachain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once this is in place, you are ready to compile your parachain node.
```

### Generating the Runtime and Genesis

Be sure first to build the node using the following (assuming you're within
`polkadot-sdk/templates/parachain`):

```shell
cargo build -p parachain-template-node --release
```

```shell
../../target/release/parachain-template-node export-genesis-state genesis
```

```shell
../../target/release/parachain-template-node export-genesis-wasm genesis-wasm
```

Within `polkadot-sdk/templates/parachain`, you should now have two files:

- **`genesis`** - the initial state of your parachain.
- **`genesis-wasm`** - the initial runtime WebAssembly blob of your parachain.

> ## Starting to Sync - Running Your Collator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Running Your Collator
```

It would help if you now started syncing your collator. Keep in mind that you will need to sync
Rococo first - this could take some time (12 hours to a day - depending on your download speed), so
best to get started ASAP. In order to avoid storing the full state of the relay chain, be sure to
run with the appropriate pruning flags (`blocks-pruning` and `state-pruning`):

```shell
./../target/release/parachain-template-node --collator \
--alice \
--force-authoring \
--base-path  <your-base-path-here> \
-- \
--chain=rococo \
--sync fast-unsafe \
--blocks-pruning 256 \
--state-pruning 256
```

> **Fun fact**: This command really spins up _two_ nodes: your collator node for your parachain,
> along with an embedded relay chain node, hence the separation in the command via `--`.

You should now see your relay chain syncing, reaching the same target that your target relay chain
is currently at:

```bash
2024-05-07 11:43:18 [Relaychain] ⚙️  Syncing 490.8 bps, target=#10342815 (9 peers), best: #10013784 (0x91d7…aeb2), finalized #10013704 (0x8556…e679), ⬇ 8.3MiB/s ⬆ 1.2kiB/s
```

> ## Create the Parathread

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Register the Parachain as a Parathread
```

With your **`genesis`** and **`genesis-wasm`** created, you can now create your parathread. Head
back to
[Network > Parachains > Parathreads (the tab)](https://polkadot.js.org/apps/#/parachains/parathreads)
in PolkadotJS, and click _+ Parathread_ in the top right. Now, you can upload your runtime and
genesis accordingly:

1. Upload `genesis-wasm` in the `code` field
2. Upload `genesis` in the `initial state` field

![Upload chain artifacts](../assets/coretime/coretime-register-parathread.png)

Pay the deposit, and you're good to go! Keep in mind the parathread takes around **~2 hours** to
onboard. You can scroll down to your ParaId to see it onboarding, for example:

![Onboarding ParaId](../assets/coretime/coretime-parachain-onboarding.png)

> ## Procuring Coretime

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Procure Coretime
```
